# Claims Analysis: A Serious Downside to Reducing CO<sub>2</sub> Emissions
### By: Saif Alam (400188337)

*A Serious Downside to Reducing CO<sub>2</sub> Emissions*, published by the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change on 2 September 2020, reviews a primary study by Faltein et al. (2020). In this article, the authors use the work of Faltein et al. as primary evidence to support the claim that there are negative consequences which stem from reduced atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. In order to highlight their argument, they utilize the experiment of Faltein et al., wherein four researchers examined the impact of decreased carbon dioxide levels on *O. pes-caprae* growth. The findings from this study noted that plants grown under reduced carbon dioxide concentrations had lower plant and bulb biomasses; under certain conditions, bulb biomass reduced by 80% and plant biomass exhibited a two-fold decrease (Faltein et al., 2020). Using this body of literature as their main source of evidence, they extrapolated the claim that humans are able to benefit greatly from having elevated levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide.

This article was selected for analysis as it is of particular interest; the claim that this article puts forth insinuates that there are severe effects of having decreased carbon dioxide concentrations and as such, posits the idea that elevated levels of CO<sub>2</sub> are of great benefit (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2020). This serves as a counterargument against the widespread notion that carbon dioxide concentrations need to be decreased as they are one of the leading drivers of climate change (Al‐Ghussain, 2019).

The credibility of this article is rather weak, and its readers should not accept the broader claims presented in this article at face value. First, the article has no author and is published on an online platform that promotes climate change skepticism and has received funding by The Heartland Institute, an organization that finances various climate change skeptics (Pappas, 2012). A point for increased confidence, however, is that the currency and timeliness of the article was fairly recent, having only been published five months prior. In terms of the accuracy and reliability of the content presented, the information was fairly well researched, with consistency between the findings listed in the article and the primary study by Faltein et al. (2020). The article also included a reference for this study as well. With respect to the validity of the arguments, while the author(s) use(s) an objective study as supporting evidence, the manner in which the information was communicated to the audience was rather biased. The author(s) of the article only used this one study as the basis for their argument and failed to collate findings from multiple studies to show both sides of the argument. For example, one could contradict the article’s claim by highlighting a recent review by Dong et al. (2018), in which researchers demonstrated that elevated carbon dioxide levels may actually serve as a hindrance to nutrient quality, in turn reducing the available proteins, magnesium, iron, and zinc for the plant. With this in mind, their broader claims seem to be a bit implausible with inconsistencies that must be flagged. For instance, by using findings for a single species of plants, they extrapolated that reduced carbon dioxide concentrations will lead to “massive reductions in global food supply, which would likely result in civil unrest and conflict” (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2020). This statement requires further clarity as it fails to mention how the total impact of *O. pes-caprae* contributes to the global food industry and if its decreased growth would actually cause that much damage to society. As such, the poor evaluation during the assessment of the article prevents the posited claims to be widely accepted.

## References

Al‐Ghussain, L., 2019. Global warming: review on driving forces and mitigation. *Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy*, 38(1), pp.13–21.

Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2020. *A Serious Downside to Reducing CO2 Emissions*. [online] CO2 Science. Available at: <https://<span></span>co2science.org/articles/V23/sep/a1.php> [Accessed 14 Feb. 2021].

Dong, J., Gruda, N., Lam, S.K., Li, X. and Duan, Z., 2018. Effects of Elevated CO2 on Nutritional Quality of Vegetables: A Review. *Frontiers in Plant Science*, [online] 9. Available at: <https://<span></span>frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2018.00924/full> [Accessed 14 Feb. 2021].

Faltein, Z., Esler, K.J., Midgley, G.F. and Ripley, B.S., 2020. Atmospheric CO2 concentrations restrict the growth of Oxalis pes-caprae bulbs used by human inhabitants of the Paleo-Agulhas plain during the Pleistocene glacials. *Quaternary Science Reviews*, 235, p.105731.

Pappas, S., 2012. *Leaked: Conservative Group Plans Anti-Climate Education Program*. [online] Scientific American. Available at: <https://<span></span>scientificamerican.com/article/leaked-conservative-group/> [Accessed 14 Feb. 2021].
